README.md, before:

# git-badc0de - a tool to improve git commits you receive

There are various practices of authoring patches or commits in version control systems.
If you are, like me, annoyed by *fix typo* fix up commits in pull or merge requests
you get at work or in a open source project,
or if you simply get too much contributions (which is good place to be, tell me how get there),
then `git-badc0de` is the tool for you.

The problem is clearly that it is too easy to make new commits.
The solution is make creating commits harder.
Git developers make `git` interface saner with each release,
and there are various tools (like GitHub web editing),
which make writing *fix typo* commits child play easy.

`git-badc0de` (GitHub: [phadej/git-badc0de](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de))
takes an out-of-the-box approach.
Instead of trying to encourage (or force) humans to put more effort
into each commit, it makes their machines do the work.

`git-badc0de` takes the `HEAD` commit, and creates an altered copy,
such that the commit hash starts with some (by default `badc0de`) prefix.
Obviously, I use `git-badc0de` in the development process of `git-badc0de` itself.
Check the tail of `git log`:

```plain
badc0dea Add CONTRIBUTING.md
badc0ded Make prefix configurable.
badc0de4 Add message to do git reset
badc0de6 Comment out some debug output
badc0de5 Initial commit
```

It's up to the project owners to decide how long prefix you want to have.
Seven base16 characters (i.e. 28 bits out of 160) is doable on modern multi-core hardware in a minute,
with good luck in less[^eightchars].
These seconds are important.
It is an opportunity to reflect,
maybe even notice a typo in the commit message.
Modern machines are so fast, and even some compilers too[^compilers],
that we don't pause and think of what we have just done.

[^eightchars]: Eight base16 characters (i.e. 4 bytes) took one and half hour of CPU time or "just" 5.5 minutes of wall clock time. I run that experiment only few times. Take a look at [deadc0de branch](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de/commits/deadc0de).

[^compilers]: If your programming language of choice is a compiled one.

How git-badc0de works
---------------------

*Git is content-addressable file system* is how
[a chapter in Pro Git book on Git objects](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-Objects) starts.
Very nice model, very easy to tinker with.
You can try out to `git cat-file -p HEAD` in your current Git project to see
the `HEAD` commit object data. In `git-badc0de` one commit looks like:

```plain
tree 91aaad77e68aa7bf94219a5b9cea97f26e2cce2b
parent badc0dea0106987c4edfb1d169b5a43d95845569
author Oleg Grenrus <oleg.grenrus@iki.fi> 1596481157 +0300
committer Oleg Grenrus <oleg.grenrus@iki.fi> 1596481157 +0300

Rewrite README.md

PoW: HRYsAAAAAAF
```

Git commit hash is a hash of a header and these contents.
A header for commit object looks like

```plain
commit <content length as ASCII number><NUL>
```

`git-badc0de` takes the most recent commit data,
and by adding some  `PoW: DECAFC0FFEE` *salts* to the end,
tries to find one which makes commit hash with the correct prefix.
It takes 11 characters to encode 64 bits in base64.
Why base64, no particular reason.

When a valid salt is found, `git-badc0de` writes the new commit object
to the Git object store.
At this point nothing is changed, only a new dangling object inside `.git` directory.
You can reset your branch to point to the new commit with
`git reset`, and `git-badc0de` invites you to do so.

Are you serious
---------------

*No.* But I had fun implementing `git-badc0de`.
I was surprised that getting seven characters "right" in a hash is an easy job.
That causes nice artifacts in GitHub web interface.

The commit shown on the project main page is always `badc0de`...

![first GitHub screenshot](https://oleg.fi/gists/images/git-badc0de-github-1.png)

... and in fact all commits seem to have the same hash...

![second GitHub screenshot](https://oleg.fi/gists/images/git-badc0de-github-2.png)

Note how command line `git log` is smart to show enough characters to make
prefixes unambiguous. It is deliberate, check on some of your smaller projects,
there `git log --oneline` probably prints seven character abbreviations.
In GHC (Haskell compiler) `git log --oneline` prints ten characters for me
(GitHub still shows just seven, so I assume it is hardcoded).

Implementation comments
-----------------------

An interesting bit is also how `git-badc0de` is implemented.

I have to confess: I started with a Python prototype.
Python comes with all pieces needed, though I essentially only needed `hashlib`.

[The Haskell implementation](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de) has eleven dependencies at the moment of writing.
Five of them are bundled with compiler, the rest six are not.
Even for some basic tasks you have to go package shopping:

- [`async`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/async) to parallelize computations
- [`base16-bytestring`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base16-bytestring)
- [`cryptohash-sha1`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptohash-sha1)
- [`primitive`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/primitive) to write some low level code
- [`utf8-string`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/utf8-string) to convert from byte UTF-8 `ByteString` representation to `String` and back.
- [`zlib`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/zlib) to compress git objects, as they are stored compressed.

My first Haskell implementation was noticeably faster than Python3 version.
I suspect that is because Haskell is simply better at gluing bytes together.

The motivation to use Haskell had two parts:

- I just use Haskell for everything. (Except for prototyping silly ideas). This is the most important reason.
- Haskell is good for writing parallel programs. This is a bonus.

To my surprise, my first Haskell parallelization attempt didn't work at all.
An idea is to spawn multiple workers, which would try different salts.
And then make them race, until one worker finds a valid salt.
Adding more workers should not slowdown the overall program,
minus maybe some small managerial overhead.

The overhead turned out to be quite large.
Parallelism in Haskell works well when you deal with Haskell "native" data.
`git-badc0de` use case is however gluing bytes (`ByteString`s) together
and calling out to C implementation of SHA1 algorithm.

The nasty detail of, I guess any, higher level languages is that
foreign function interface has culprits.
I run into `foreign import unsafe` issue.
You may read about `foreign import unsafe` in [the excellent GHC User Guide](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/ffi-chap.html#guaranteed-call-safety).

<blockquote>
GHC <b>guarantees</b> that garbage collection will never occur during an <code>unsafe</code> call, ...
</blockquote>

With many threads generating some amount of garbage,
but also calling `unsafe` foreign functions in a tight loop caused problems.
Surprisingly, both `cryptohash-sha1` and `bytestring` use plenty of `unsafe` calls
([`cryptonite`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptonite-0.27/docs/src/Crypto.Hash.SHA1.html#line-26) uses too).

My solution was to redo the loop. Less garbage generation and less foreign calls.

`cryptohash-sha1` (and `cryptonite`) import `_init`, `_update` and `_finalize`
C functions. The hashing context is allocated and plumbing done in Haskell.
However, we can setup things in way such that we pass a single continuous block of memory to be hashed.
This functionality is missing from the library, so I copied `cbits/` from
`cryptohash-sha1` and added small C function, to do C plumbing in C:

```c
void
hs_cryptohash_sha1(const uint8_t *data, size_t len, uint8_t *out)
{
  struct sha1_ctx ctx;
  hs_cryptohash_sha1_init(&ctx);
  hs_cryptohash_sha1_update(&ctx, data, len);
  hs_cryptohash_sha1_finalize(&ctx, out);
}
```

This way we can have one `safe` foreign call to calculate the hash.
We have to make sure that pointers are pointing at pinned memory,
i.e. memory which garbage collector won't move.

Next, the same problem is in the `bytestring` library,
I was naive to think that as byte data I work with is so small,
that concatenating it (and thus `memcpy`ing) won't be noticeable,
hashing should dominate.
Usually it isn't a problem, but as copying was done on each loop
iteration and `memcpy` is `foreign import unsafe` in `bytestring`
library, that also contributed to slowdown.
That was my hypothesis.

Figuring out how to do it better with `bytestring` seemed difficult,
so I opted for a different solution. Write some C-in-Haskell.
Now each worker creates own *mutable* template, which is updated with new salt
on each loop iteration.
Salt length is fixed, so we don't need to change the commit object header.
As a bonus, the loop become essentially non-allocating (I didn't check though).

After that change, `git-badc0de` started to use all the cores, and not just spin in GC locks.
The runtime system statistics are nice to look at

```plain
                                Tot time (elapsed)  Avg pause  Max pause
Gen  0      0 colls,     0 par    0.000s   0.000s     0.0000s    0.0000s
Gen  1      1 colls,     0 par    0.000s   0.000s     0.0004s    0.0004s

...

Productivity 100.0% of total user, 99.9% of total elapsed
```

No time is spent in garbage collection. Productivity is an amount of time
used to do actual work and not collecting garbage.
Disclaimer: it seems that waiting for GC locks is not counted towards GC time,
but as there was only a single collection, that doesn't matter.

I could optimize further:
as the salt is at the end of the content it is silly
to rehash whole commit object every time.
Yet, `git-badc0de` is silly project to begin with,
and I am satisfied with the current state.

The lesson here is that foreign function interface (FFI) is not easy,
you have to think and test.

"Luckily" I learned about the `unsafe` issue recently
in [`postgresql-libpq`](https://github.com/phadej/postgresql-libpq/pull/9),
so was able to think about it causing my problems.
In this case, `unsafe` doesn't mean that "I know what I'm doing" (as e.g. with `unsafePerformIO`),
but rather the opposite.

Also, I don't think that we (= Haskell ecosystem) have a good tooling to benchmark how code behaves in highly parallel environments.
I *hope* that `Data.ByteString.Builder`, for example, doesn't use any `unsafe` foreign calls,
Ecosystem relies on that module for constructing JSON (in `aeson`) and HTML (both `blaze-markup` and `lucid`).
Something for someone to test, maybe fix and document.

Learnings
---------

Does this mean that Haskell is crap, and the promise for easy parallel
and concurrent programming is a lie, and we should all use Rust instead?

Well, no.
In this isolated example, Rust would probably shine.
There are, however, also other parts than hashing loop even in this simple program,
and they have to be written as well.
There Haskell feels a lot like Python,
in a sense that I can just write code which works.

Python was quite nice in the very early prototyping stage,
as it happened to have all needed functionality available in the repl.
I have to reveal that the "early prototyping stage" lasted for maybe 10 or 15 minutes.
With Haskell, you would need to restart repl to add a new library, losing all the context, which would killed the flow.
For some other "problem"I might start to prototype directly in Haskell.
I have no experience with how nice repl experience Rust has.

If this project were to grow larger, I would rewrite
the hashing loop in C, instead of writing C-in-Haskell.
Or in Rust, if I that was easier to setup.
(GHC knows how to invoke C compiler, but not Rust).

Haskell is a great glue language, among many other great properties it has.
Don't believe anyone who tells you otherwise.

Commit message:

Add a section about ordered hashes. Other edits.
PoW: ySQ2AAAAAAH

README.md, after:

# git-badc0de - a tool to improve git commits you receive

There are various practices of authoring patches or commits in version control systems.
If you are, like me, annoyed by *fix typo* fix up commits in pull or merge requests
you get at work or in a open source project,
or if you simply get too much contributions (which is good place to be, tell me how get there),
then `git-badc0de` is the tool for you.

The problem is clearly that it is too easy to make new commits.
The solution is make creating commits harder.
Git developers make `git` interface saner with each release,
and there are various tools (like GitHub web editing),
which make writing *fix typo* commits child play easy.

`git-badc0de` (GitHub: [phadej/git-badc0de](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de))
takes an out-of-the-box approach.
Instead of trying to encourage (or force) humans to put more effort
into each commit, it makes their machines do the work.

`git-badc0de` takes the `HEAD` commit, and creates an altered copy,
such that the commit hash starts with some (by default `badc0de`) prefix.
Obviously, I use `git-badc0de` in the development process of `git-badc0de` itself.
Check the tail of `git log`:

```plain
badc0dea Add CONTRIBUTING.md
badc0ded Make prefix configurable.
badc0de4 Add message to do git reset
badc0de6 Comment out some debug output
badc0de5 Initial commit
```

It's up to the project owners to decide how long prefix you want to have.
Seven base16 characters (i.e. 28 bits out of 160) is doable on modern multi-core hardware in a minute,
with good luck in less[^eightchars].
These seconds are important.
It is an opportunity to reflect,
maybe even notice a typo in the commit message.
Modern machines are so fast, and even some compilers too[^compilers],
that we don't pause and think of what we have just done.

[^eightchars]: Eight base16 characters (i.e. 4 bytes) took one and half hour of CPU time or "just" 5.5 minutes of wall clock time. I run that experiment only few times. Take a look at [deadc0de branch](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de/commits/deadc0de).

[^compilers]: If your programming language of choice is a compiled one.

How git-badc0de works
---------------------

*Git is content-addressable file system* is how
[a chapter in Pro Git book on Git objects](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-Objects) starts.
Very nice model, very easy to tinker with.
You can try out to `git cat-file -p HEAD` in your current Git project to see
the `HEAD` commit object data. In `git-badc0de` one commit looks like:

```plain
tree 91aaad77e68aa7bf94219a5b9cea97f26e2cce2b
parent badc0dea0106987c4edfb1d169b5a43d95845569
author Oleg Grenrus <oleg.grenrus@iki.fi> 1596481157 +0300
committer Oleg Grenrus <oleg.grenrus@iki.fi> 1596481157 +0300

Rewrite README.md

PoW: HRYsAAAAAAF
```

Git commit hash is a hash of a header and these contents.
A header for commit object looks like

```plain
commit <content length as ASCII number><NUL>
```

`git-badc0de` takes the most recent commit data,
and by adding some  `PoW: DECAFC0FFEE` *salts* to the end,
tries to find one which makes commit hash with the correct prefix.
It takes 11 characters to encode 64 bits in base64.
Why base64, no particular reason.

When a valid salt is found, `git-badc0de` writes the new commit object
to the Git object store.
At this point nothing is changed, only a new dangling object inside `.git` directory.
You can reset your branch to point to the new commit with
`git reset`, and `git-badc0de` invites you to do so.

Are you serious
---------------

*No.* But I had fun implementing `git-badc0de`.
I was surprised that getting seven characters "right" in a hash is an easy job.
That causes nice artifacts in GitHub web interface.

The top commit shown on [the project main page](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de) is always `badc0de`...

![first GitHub screenshot](https://oleg.fi/gists/images/git-badc0de-github-1.png)

... and in fact [all commits](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de/commits/master) seem to have the same hash (prefix)...

![second GitHub screenshot](https://oleg.fi/gists/images/git-badc0de-github-2.png)

Note how command line `git log` is smart to show enough characters to make
prefixes unambiguous. It is deliberate, check on some of your smaller projects,
there `git log --oneline` probably prints seven character abbreviations.
In GHC (Haskell compiler) `git log --oneline` prints ten characters for me
(GitHub still shows just seven, so I assume it is hardcoded).

We can also use `git-badc0de` to produce commits with ordered hashes!
The downside is that you have to decide the maximum commit count at the start.
Yet $4^7 = 16384$ might be enough for many smaller projects.
See [ordered branch](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de/commits/ordered),
isn't that cool!?

![third GitHub screenshot](https://oleg.fi/gists/images/git-badc0de-github-3.png)

Implementation comments
-----------------------

How `git-badc0de` is implemented?
I have to confess: I started with a Python prototype.
Python comes with all pieces needed, though I essentially only needed `hashlib`.

[The Haskell implementation](https://github.com/phadej/git-badc0de) has eleven dependencies at the moment of writing.
Five of them are bundled with compiler, the rest six are not.
Even for some basic tasks you have to go package shopping:

- [`async`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/async) to parallelize computations
- [`base16-bytestring`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base16-bytestring)
- [`cryptohash-sha1`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptohash-sha1)
- [`primitive`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/primitive) to write some low level code
- [`utf8-string`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/utf8-string) to convert from byte UTF-8 `ByteString` representation to `String` and back.
- [`zlib`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/zlib) to compress git objects, as they are stored compressed.

My first Haskell implementation was noticeably faster than Python3 version.
I suspect that is because Haskell is simply better at gluing bytes together.

The motivation to use Haskell had two parts:

- I just use Haskell for everything. (Except for prototyping silly ideas). This is the most important reason.
- Haskell is good for writing parallel programs. This is a bonus.

To my surprise, my first Haskell parallelization attempt didn't work at all.
An idea is to spawn multiple workers, which would try different salts.
And then make them race, until one worker finds a valid salt.
Adding more workers should not slowdown the overall program,
minus maybe some small managerial overhead.

The overhead turned out to be quite large.
Parallelism in Haskell works well when you deal with Haskell "native" data.
`git-badc0de` use case is however gluing bytes (`ByteString`s) together
and calling out to C implementation of SHA1 algorithm.

The nasty detail of, I guess any, higher level languages is that
foreign function interface has culprits.
I run into `foreign import unsafe` issue.
You may read about `foreign import unsafe` in [the excellent GHC User Guide](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/ffi-chap.html#guaranteed-call-safety).

<blockquote>
GHC <b>guarantees</b> that garbage collection will never occur during an <code>unsafe</code> call, ...
</blockquote>

With many threads generating some amount of garbage,
but also calling `unsafe` foreign functions in a tight loop caused problems.
Surprisingly, both `cryptohash-sha1` and `bytestring` use plenty of `unsafe` calls
([`cryptonite`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/cryptonite-0.27/docs/src/Crypto.Hash.SHA1.html#line-26) uses too).

My solution was to redo the loop. Less garbage generation and less foreign calls.

`cryptohash-sha1` (and `cryptonite`) import `_init`, `_update` and `_finalize`
C functions. The hashing context is allocated and plumbing done in Haskell.
However, we can setup things in way such that we pass a single continuous block of memory to be hashed.
This functionality is missing from the library, so I copied `cbits/` from
`cryptohash-sha1` and added small C function, to do C plumbing in C:

```c
void
hs_cryptohash_sha1(const uint8_t *data, size_t len, uint8_t *out)
{
  struct sha1_ctx ctx;
  hs_cryptohash_sha1_init(&ctx);
  hs_cryptohash_sha1_update(&ctx, data, len);
  hs_cryptohash_sha1_finalize(&ctx, out);
}
```

This way we can have one `safe` foreign call to calculate the hash.
We have to make sure that pointers are pointing at pinned memory,
i.e. memory which garbage collector won't move.

Next, the same problem is in the `bytestring` library,
I was naive to think that as byte data I work with is so small,
that concatenating it (and thus `memcpy`ing) won't be noticeable,
hashing should dominate.
Usually it isn't a problem, but as copying was done on each loop
iteration and `memcpy` is `foreign import unsafe` in `bytestring`
library, that also contributed to slowdown.
That was my hypothesis.

Figuring out how to do it better with `bytestring` seemed difficult,
so I opted for a different solution. Write some C-in-Haskell.
Now each worker creates own *mutable* template, which is updated with new salt
on each loop iteration.
Salt length is fixed, so we don't need to change the commit object header.
As a bonus, the loop become essentially non-allocating (I didn't check though).

After that change, `git-badc0de` started to use all the cores, and not just spin in GC locks.
The runtime system statistics are nice to look at

```plain
                                Tot time (elapsed)  Avg pause  Max pause
Gen  0      0 colls,     0 par    0.000s   0.000s     0.0000s    0.0000s
Gen  1      1 colls,     0 par    0.000s   0.000s     0.0004s    0.0004s

...

Productivity 100.0% of total user, 99.9% of total elapsed
```

No time is spent in garbage collection. Productivity is an amount of time
used to do actual work and not collecting garbage.
Disclaimer: it seems that waiting for GC locks is not counted towards GC time,
but as there was only a single collection, that doesn't matter.

I could optimize further:
as the salt is at the end of the content it is silly
to rehash whole commit object every time.
Yet, `git-badc0de` is silly project to begin with,
and I am satisfied with the current state.

The lesson here is that foreign function interface (FFI) is not easy,
you have to think and test.

"Luckily" I learned about the `unsafe` issue recently
in [`postgresql-libpq`](https://github.com/phadej/postgresql-libpq/pull/9),
so was able to think about it causing my problems.
In this case, `unsafe` doesn't mean that "I know what I'm doing" (as e.g. with `unsafePerformIO`),
but rather the opposite.

Also, I don't think that we (= Haskell ecosystem) have a good tooling to benchmark how code behaves in highly parallel environments.
I *hope* that `Data.ByteString.Builder`, for example, doesn't use any `unsafe` foreign calls,
Ecosystem relies on that module for constructing JSON (in `aeson`) and HTML (both `blaze-markup` and `lucid`).
Something for someone to test, maybe fix and document.

Learnings
---------

Does this mean that Haskell is crap, and the promise for easy parallel
and concurrent programming is a lie, and we should all use Rust instead?

Well, no.
In this isolated example, Rust would probably shine.
There are, however, also other parts than hashing loop even in this simple program,
and they have to be written as well.
There Haskell feels a lot like Python,
in a sense that I can just write consice code which works.

Python was quite nice in the very early prototyping stage,
as it happened to have all needed functionality available in the repl.
The "early prototyping stage" lasted for maybe 10 or 15 minutes,
that was enough to verify that basic idea might work.
With Haskell, you would need to restart repl to add a new library, losing all the context, which would killed the flow.
For some other "problem"I might start to prototype directly in Haskell.
I have no experience with how nice repl experience Rust has.

If `git-badc0de` project were to develop further, I would rewrite
the hashing loop in C, instead of writing C-in-Haskell. Maybe.
Or in Rust, if I that was easier to setup.
(GHC knows how to invoke C compiler).

Haskell is a great glue language, among many other great properties it has.
Don't believe anyone who tells you otherwise.
